---
layout: post
title: "Robert J. Sawyer - WWW: Wake"
date: 2015-09-18
---

***

<b>Robert J. Sawyer</b> 2009. _WWW: Wake_. New York: Ace Books.

A great example of the best kind of science fiction: takes up themes in current and near-future technology and embarks on a journey to a believable future.  Believable to those who have been reading <a href="https://timeteam.github.io/blog/2015/09/01/How-to-create-a-mind/"> Raymond Kurzweil</a>, anyway.

The protagonist is Caitlin, a well-imagined teenage girl who is blind from birth, due to signal processing errors in the retina.  A Japanese researchers has a possible solution in the form of an implant with attached wi-fi enabled hardware (for software updates).  But the implant instead enables Caitlin to "see" the internet, which at the same time is becoming self-aware; artificially intelligent.  Caitlin learns to interact; the internet likewise.

Several engaging sub-plots develop the artificial intelligence theme in different ways.  It turns out Caitlin's Dad (a physicist) has an autistic condition which is a revelation to Caitlin (and the reader) and provides some great moments.  Another sub-plot involving a bonobo-chimpanzee hybrid and an orangutan in the care of psychologists is less successful; it doesn't seem to go anywhere but on the other hand this is only volume 1 of a trilogy.  Yet another sub-plot in China also seems to be minimally developed (as yet).

Some minor flaws in the integration of sub-plots hardly detracts at all from a great read.  I'm looking forward to seeing where Robert Sawyer takes all this in _WWW: Watch_ and _WWW: Wonder_.

The acknowledgments provide some useful background and, most interestingly, point the reader to an academic work by <b>Julian Jaynes</b>:_The Origin of Conciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind_ which is easily found on the internet and has been added to my already ridiculously overwhelming in-tray.  



